As I recall, you make my mind bounce back just a little.
As I recall, one of the things that Dr. Williams said to the board in praise of Calhoun to be the new president was that if they were going to have a chancellor and a president, if we're going back to the system, that he and Calhoun worked well together.
and that Calhoun worked well with the general campus leadership, that there would not then be a break in the continuity which he, Williams, hoped had been continued from Rudder to Williams and would now go on, and that he thought that Calhoun had to gather a good team out of which they might find some people with promise
in the future years, but apparently the board had made up their mind that they were going to go in another direction.
Were you, as you look back on it now, do you think of any particular changes in any major directions made by Jarvis from previous?
No, I really don't.
And one thing, Jervis really paid a lot of attention to outside matters, to public relations, to keeping connections with people that we ought to be connected with.
And to a large extent, Howard and I ran things internally.
And John Koldis, of course, for the students.
But we'd always take our stuff in for his approval, but it was usually whatever we wanted to do.
But he didn't make any sweeping changes.
Describe those colleagues, Koldis and Vestal.
Let me describe Vestal this way as saying,
His attitude as a financial officer was, what can I do to help the functions of A&M, which are teaching and research?
How can I help?
Of course, it also, my view is biased, and he's a dear personal friend, so largely as a result of having worked together.
Coldest also was a superb person with whom to cooperate, affable and pleasant
with a photographic memory of people's names.
Absolutely.
Yeah, they were a joy to work with.
Let's see, and whether their title was vice president or not, the vice presidents were you, Vestal,
Colas.
And then he appointed Jarvis's, oh yes, there was a sweeping change, and he appointed vice presidents for agriculture and for engineering.
Sorry, I've forgotten that.
And he appointed Perry as vice president for agriculture and Fred for engineering.
And then they were
vice presidents, and then because of his intense interest in foreign affairs, Terry Greathouse was appointed vice president for foreign programs.
Then another thing, you remember when he split off, he took the Development Foundation and Galveston.
And I think you got to thinking over, now wait a minute, the Development Foundation is to develop Texas A&M.
And so Jarvis and I had been at a meeting of the coordinating board or something, and we were in Austin.
And Jack came up to us after it was over and said, Jarvis, I'm sending the Development Foundation back to the university.
And he said, but I do think that Bob Walker ought to be a vice president.
And so that made the, what, in the sixth, the vice president.
In regard to him, how did you find working with Bob Walker?
Had very little contact with him.
I've never thought that Bob and his folks were at all interruptive or contradictory.
I've always thought of them as positive and very
prone to work within the appropriate academic channels.
I had very little to do with him in that sense.
And one of the deans, when I was vice president, one of the deans said, I thought expressed pretty well, said, Dr. Walker seems to have his own agenda.
So whatever I suggest doesn't make much difference.
All right.
So you served with Jarvis for four years.
Yeah, three and a half.
Let's see, what was it?
Three and a half, yeah.
Oh, wait a minute.
Let me think a minute.
It was 77.
It was September 77 until July of 80 when he was, yes, okay, just under three years.
During that, and I'm going to ask the negative, who were the key deans in that period?
Dave Maxwell, of course.
What made him so?
Well, he'd been around several years, knew a lot of people, was level-headed and articulate, just an all-around asset.
Of course, we had a new dean of engineering because Benson had moved up to the system.
But no, he didn't move up to the system until Dr. Hubert took over.
So he had moved up to the vice presidency.
Harry, of course, was still in place.
And agriculture was running well.
No real difficulties there.
Education was obviously doing well under Hubert.
He and I had differences later, obviously.
But, you know, those three, then when Bob Stone came in, he was absolutely stellar.
Well, he came in within about a year of that time.
He was really terrific.
When they dedicated the portrait, his portrait, they asked me to make a few remarks, and I said, as far as I can recall, he was probably the best dean of anything I'd ever known anywhere.
Howard, one time I made the remark, he said, I think some people don't get along too well at Dean Stone because he's so much smarter than they are.
And the numbers were growing in every way during those years.
What were the typical problems that you had to cope with as the chief academic officer?
Well, the rapid growth of enrollment was one of the worst things.
I could not make the board understand that we needed to cap this off and slow it down.
And I remember Mr. Bright said, well, why isn't the University of Texas having this trouble?
Well, Mr. Bright, they're not growing as fast as we are, and the appropriation keeps up with them better.
And that's when we began taking, we talked the other day at our meeting about taking available fund money and supplementing faculty salaries because we simply had to.
And the amount that we were putting in in those days was such that, as John Blocker said when I told him, we'll never catch up.
And as the new Regents came on, some of them were really keen to try to get a grasp on the financial situation, but they didn't know the right questions to ask the financial people who are not about to volunteer any information.
And they didn't think to come around and ask Howard and me, what questions should we ask?
So the growth, the rapid growth was one of the things.
We couldn't keep up with faculty, with facilities, and just have time to
to digest this and settle it.
So that was the biggest problem that I felt that we had.
Did you ever have any regents try to interfere, micromanage?
I had one who, through Jack Williams when I was dean of science, had one regent whom I really liked.
asked Jack Williams to give a faculty job to a young person who had been not selected for tenure at another institution.
And that was a hard thing to do.
The department had cooperated nicely with me.
Actually, the guy, I believe, had won the vote in his department and was turned down at an administrative level.
He's turned out to be quite good here.
That's the only time I can think of when a board member.
But even in those tougher years, in the late 70s, you didn't have board members trying to tell you or chief academic officer what to do about this, that, or the other.
I don't think I ever did.
And I was on good terms with some of them.
I wasn't bosom buddies with them, but we knew each other well and reasonably well, and they essentially didn't bother me.
In those years when you were the chief academic officer, as you look back on it, of what are you most proud now in terms of accomplishments and goals achieved and so forth?
I think that the emerging eminence in research of our university across the broad sweep would be, if I had anything to do with it, I guess I'm proudest of that.
And also, I think that the recruitment of outstanding faculty was something that I took pleasure in.
I think that the university has done well in recruiting extremely senior people.
Did you know Derek Barton?
I'd made him a time or two, but you know, this was quite a catch.
I mean, I didn't have anything to do with it.
It was long gone.
But I asked Art Martellman, I said, now, does Barton live in England and drop in here for a week, a year, like that guy over at the University of Texas in chemistry?
He said, Derek Barton lives in College Station.
His laboratory is in our building, and he's there working every day.
That's great.
Of course, he had won his Nobel Prize in Britain,
And then it had to retire from a job in France, but it was just, I thought, quite a catch to get.
But we had prepared the way by getting people who attend to attract the Derek Bartons.
And I think that faculty recruitment and our broad advances in research are two of the things that I'm proudest of.
I think also the fact that we have maintained what I think is a good rapport with the students.
In other words, I think that there's a much more family atmosphere here than in most universities.
I think it's friendly and that probably the students feel like the university is smaller than it is.
Do you remember any, as you look back, do you remember any missed opportunities now being armed with hindsight?
Oh yeah, there are a lot of them.
One thing, one specific thing that sticks in my mind, we had an opportunity to recruit Bob Marshak, who was at that time president of the City College of New York,
preeminent theoretical physicist who wanted to come here and set up an institute of theoretical science, chemistry and physics.
And we had it all worked out and somebody spilled the beans in New York, went down the drain.
Any others?
Can't think of any other.
Any legislative and or board decisions that stymied something that could have been?
Well, one thing that was a constant, two things that were constant frustration.
One was the legislative mandate of teaching hours, which I think is wrong.
And I heard Doyle Willis, who used to be a senator, and then he got beat there or he didn't run.
Then he ran as a representative.
And I was at a luncheon one time.
He said, I don't think it's any of our business to do things like that.
The universities ought to handle it.
May your tribe increase.
And the other thing, Haskell, is the lack of a sabbatical program.
I think that's probably the worst faculty shortcoming that we have in the university.
And I don't see us making any headway toward it.
I have not seen any headway in all the years I've been here.
During your vice presidential years, describe a typical work day.
Including the luncheons and receptions.
Well, gosh, I don't think any day was ever typical, Haskell, but I've never been an early morning person.
I'd get to the office about 8, 15, 8, 10, or 15, and Betty Robinson, who was my secretary for 18 years, superb, and that managed my calendar and my appointments.
I made it the point to see anybody who needed to see me, who thought he needed to see me.
And I would do those things in the morning, would say,
meet with the people there in the office, the way you and Howard and Jervis and I frequently would meet, just informally.
I would have anybody who wanted to come in for a meeting.
Then I'd probably go to Super Salad for lunch, and then go to APC Academic Programs Council at 1 o'clock, which would last till 2.30 or 3, I guess.
go back and go through this gosh awful wad of papers that seemed to demand my signature.
I would look for the initials PG by the signature line.
If it was there, I signed it.
I don't know how many orders for liquor I signed.
But if Peter had checked it out, I knew it was ethical and legal.
And then it may be that I've been invited to come and talk to a department or to
a college meeting, and there may be a reception for some visiting person or a dinner that night.
So it was, the days were pretty long, frankly.
You know that.
You've lived longer days than I have.
And about what percentage of the middays were working lunches with some group, some appearance that you almost had to make?
Not a terribly high percentage.
I tended to shy away from a lot of these if I could and was pretty successful.
And I'd say that not more than 15 percent, something like that.
How many evenings were scheduled?
Probably more than.
Kitty, how many evenings of ours were preempted?
30, 40 percent.
That's right.
And many weekends.
Many weekends.
See, one thing, I quit going to football games because for so many years, a football day was a day of work for me.
And I couldn't go in and turn on the television if A&M's playing.
If they're not playing, I don't even turn on the television.
You mentioned a splendid secretary.
What was her, as you saw it, what was her task?
When I was dean of science, she ran the office.
And when I became vice president, I took her over and I wanted her to manage my calendar, my correspondence, my appointments, my travel.
And I wanted Jeanette to run the office because Jeanette had been running the office.
And personality-wise, she's better at that than Betty is.
Betty does not like to supervise other people, particularly.
Jeanette doesn't mind doing it and does it superbly, I think.
So after Jarvis had offered me the job and before it was announced, I made two phone calls.
I called Jeanette Farris.
I called Peter Green and I said,
If it turns out that I am put in this job, I want you and you to stay exactly where you are.
And I wanted them to know that, to have that opportunity before somebody else got to them.
And Peter, what were his responsibilities?
He was assistant vice president for, we put him in for a change of title and promotion, assistant vice president for academic budgets.
And he was our budgeteer.
He really took that responsibility off my shoulders.
And then, let's see.
That's it, isn't it?
Yeah.
Of course, the receptionist and typing pool and so forth.
All right.
When you came over, did Jarvis tell you that anybody wants to stay, like me or anybody else, or was that entirely you were?
That's up to me.
That's what I assume.
Yeah.
Well, since you were a dean, I knew you were in place.
I didn't worry about you because I figured that the fact that you were a dean, you were going to stay there.
I knew that engineering would grab
Peter and Jeanette like that if they figured.
So I didn't bother you because I knew as a dean you were going to stay there.
But no, he didn't issue any instructions on that line.
It's what I wanted to do.
See if you agree with this generalization that I've reached.
During those Williams-Rutter years, we had a pleasant mix in key roles of people that had long experience here and people whose experience was somewhere else.
It wasn't all of one or all of the other.
That's correct, absolutely.
And today I fear it's more of the outsiders, that the nervous reaction is, oh, that somebody from outside is always better.
Let's see.
The library reported to you
Dr. Hoadley.
Dr. Hoadley, and she had been selected by Calhoun.
Correct.
What other non... Oh, let's see.
The library... Research Foundation by then is entirely... It's independent.
Independent.
reports to its own counselors and board.
So there really wasn't any?
That's about it.
The academic college is in the library.
All right.
Let's go near the end of my years here.
As I recall, sometime in the spring of 1980, in one of our after five o'clock conversations in President Miller's office, we were talking about his frustration with the stations and services reporting to the system instead of to the campus.
And I recall you and Howard particularly saying, Jarvis, you know, back off.
And my memory is that he kind of said, yeah, you're right, you're right.
And one of you, I think, even said, look, Jarvis, if you just sit tight, Hubert's going to retire in a couple years.
Who knows?
You might.
All right.
As we get near that board meeting in the fall of, in summer of 1980,
Were you aware of any coming crisis regarding Dr. Miller as president?
No.
I knew that
He had prepared a briefing book to send to the board members about the organization, about the reporting and so forth, and cooperation or lack thereof between the system and the president's office.
And the evening before that board meeting, you remember I wired you and I called you in El Paso.
But the evening before that,
The Vestals, the Prescotts, and the Millers had dinner at the President's home with two board members and the Chancellor.
That's Tuesday night?
Uh-huh.
Wednesday is the night of the decisions.
Okay, you're right.
They normally meet on the... You're saying, and the Chancellor.
And the Chancellor.
And everything was pleasant, no hint of any storm clouds on the horizon, and the next evening President Miller was out.
Let me add to the tape recorder's contents that that Tuesday morning, the morning before that dinner you just mentioned,
You hosted a going away reception for me at mid-morning in the Koch building, and early that morning it occurred to me that I should go over and thank the chancellor, my seventh grade band director, my twelfth grade principal, who became dean of arts and sciences the same summer that I got a temporary nine-month job teaching history here.
In that, as I was saying thank you to him and getting ready to leave, he said, sit down, I need to chat with you a second.
Oh, and he asked me to name the five best department heads on the campus.
And I quickly said, well, gee, I don't know what I can do five.
Let me do, just go through each of the colleges right quickly and tell you the ones that come to mind.
He asked me to do engineering first.
I mentioned Charlie Holland and one or two others and he said, you didn't mention Chuck Sampson.
And I said, well, sir, he's not a department head anymore.
He said, well, why isn't he?
I didn't want to tell him that I had understood there had been some complaints some months earlier.
And he asked me a bunch of other questions about Dr. Sampson.
And so when I got back to the reception, I pulled you and Dr. Miller aside and said, hey, yesterday morning at staff meeting there was mention that one of the things that may come up at this board meeting with Regents this week is the selection of a new Vice Chancellor for Engineering.
I think I may have gotten a clue a while ago who it might be.
And I described that, and I remember everybody in the group kind of saying, yeah, yeah, that could be, could be.
So that when we drove away, I certainly wasn't aware of any crisis.
Then when we got to El Paso,
And after spending the late afternoon and early evening looking at the house where we were going to be living, trying to figure out how the furniture would fit in, we got at the motel that note to call you, and when I got the note, we were late getting back, it was then 10.30 Mountain Time.
And my wife said, what is it?
And I said, I don't know.
It's to call at Dr. Miller's house.
And she said, what do you think it is?
And I said, well, I know it's not him saying, well, good luck, we're thinking about you.
I said, it's got to be something important.
What do you think it is?
And I said, well, perhaps one of the Miller daughters has had an accident and then an attempt to add humor.
I said, but the board's meeting this week.
Anything is fine.
Anything can happen.
Then I'm awakened the next morning by 8 o'clock.
before 8 o'clock mountain time with some newspaper reporters calling from here, Austin and Houston.
They had somehow found out where I was.
They wanted to know my opinion and that's how I learned what had happened.
How did you first become aware of what had happened?
We were at a reception over at the, down at Ramada Inn, I believe it was.
Oh, architecture, wasn't it?
Hmm?
Wasn't it architecture reception?
I don't know, it's the usual suspects there, and the board, some board members walked in, and is this censored?
One of them announced, well, we fired the son of a bitch.
which I thought was a reflection of a considerable lack of class.
And then we got a call to come to the president's house and I got Perry and told Kitty, take Francis home.
And we went over there and fell out of the blue.
Now, as I understand it, the board had had lunch
with Dr. and Mrs. Miller at the President's house on Wednesday and then had gone over and convened in a meeting that was not officially announced as a board meeting.
If that's correct, therefore by the narrow reading of Texas law it was an
I wasn't aware, or if I was, I'd forgotten that it was not under the Open Meetings Act.
I have heard in hindsight that Dr. Miller thought after the luncheon, and then your mention of the previous evening, that he was optimistic
Oh, after the board members and the chancellor had left, we sat there with the Millers for a while, and he turned to Howard and we said, well, what do you think?
How do things go?
Well, things are very pleasant.
Everything seems fine.
And there were no reasons given.
And he, correct me if I'm wrong, he was summoned over 5 o'clock or so.
I believe that's right, uh-huh.
To come over to the board area of the MSC and there they read him the statement that he was terminated as of that day.
I believe that's correct.
And they did not give him any.
Anywise, as far as I'm aware, nothing was said.
Then did any board member say anything to you at that reception or anything else?
No.
All right.
When did they appoint the interim president?
I believe the next morning, but I'm not sure.
So the next part of this would be to try to capture the transition.
So Chuck Sampson becomes the interim president and he is physically in place Monday morning?
I think so.
Dr. Hubert brought him over to, I believe we called a meeting of the deans, and we met in that conference room on second floor of Coke, and Dr. Hubert brought him in and presented him as the acting president and said, I'll leave him in your capable hands.
All right.
What were Chuck's?
What were Dr. Sampson's first actions?
Did he meet with each of you vice presidents?
I'm sure he did.
I don't remember the details, but I'm sure he did to get oriented on what we were doing and where things were.
Did you get any directions?
Did you get any guidance from him that you were to change any directions?
No, I don't think so.
And see, he's still, he's very tentative in that he's designated as acting.
And also, I think he felt that it was too early to institute any changes.
The only thing that he, I recall, the only initiative that he brought forth was that group of faculty meetings that I told you about earlier.
he was uh well you uh well you know him he's a he's a nice nice guy easygoing and pleasant and and uh i'd say a thoroughly ethical and moral guy and uh but uh very low-key and as an administrator i would call him very low-key and he was hard worker oh yes yeah oh yeah that you know they would he would leave with
two satchels full of stuff to be signed and taken.